---
layout: single
title:  "Blocks in Perl 6"
published: true
---

# BLOCKS AND CLOSURES

# The Ways to Enclose Code in Perl 6

Perl 6 code is structured, scoped and invoked
in fundamental units called [`Block`s](https://docs.perl6.org/type/Block)
(technically, there is an
even more fundamental level called [`Code`](https://docs.perl6.org/type/Code)
but that will be outside of
the scope of this article). A `Block` is both a data-type
and a core syntactical feature in Perl 6. When I'm talking about it as
a data-type, I'll try to spell it with a capital-"B" to distinguish from
a "block" meaning the syntax where a section of code is enclosed
in braces, forming a block that is, in turn, stored internally as
a `Block`.

All of the other types of
abstractions of executable units are derived from the `Block` including
the `Routine` and `Method`
(see the [type graph for `Routine`](https://docs.perl6.org/type/Routine#Type_Graph)
for more clarity on these relationships.

## What is a block?

In general terms, a block is any brace-enclosed piece of Perl 6 code,
such as:

```
my $x = 42;
{
    my $y = 24;
    say "$x, $y";
}
```

Braces around code create blocks and they, in turn, create scope.
Scope is how variables are made visible and invisible to different parts
of your program. In the above example, the definition of `$x` is visible
anywhere in the listed code because it is in the outer-most (implicit)
block, and so the `say` can print its value. But
the definition of `$y` is only visible within the inner block because it was
declared using the lexical scoping operator, `my` and my attaches the
variable to the scope of the inner-most block that contains it.
A block represents
a lexical scope (lexical, meaning word- or vocabulary-related, is used to
describe something that exists within certain "tokens" in an input file
such as the `$x, $y` appearing "lexically" within the double quotes).

## But blocks are sort of routines

A block that is intended to be invoked through means other than simply
proceeding from an enclosing scope is called a routine. Like blocks,
routines are both an abstract syntactical element of the language and
the name of the data structure (`Routine`) that those elements are
represented by.

Technically, there is nothing that a `Routine` has that a `Block` does
not
([the definition of `Routine`](https://github.com/rakudo/rakudo/blob/master/src/core/Routine.pm6)
is essentially just `class Routine is Block {}` with a few extra technical
details) but we generally try to separate the two,
logically, to indicate how they are intended to be used.

A routine is declared like so:

    sub f($x, $y) {
        $x.substr(0, $y);
    }

The parts of a routine are:

* An introductory keyword or operator - `sub` in this case.
* The name - A bare identifier that has the same naming rules as variables.
* The signature - An (optional and sometimes implicit)
  list of parameters and other items that define calling
  detailed below (see [signatures](https://docs.perl6.org/language/functions#Signatures)).
* The block - A brace-enclosed block of statements.
* Its return value - Either the value of the last statement executed
  within the block (including sub-blocks) or the value returned
  explicitly by the `return` statement.

All of the parameters are considered to be within the scope of the
block, including any sub-blocks, as are any variables declared within it.

## Anonymous Routines

Routines can exist without a name or "anonymously". Perl 5 programmers
will be familiar with the `sub` form of anonymous routines:

    my $f = sub ($x, $y) { $x.substr(0, $y) };

In this case, the subroutine cannot be called directly by name, since it
does not have one, and so must be saved to a variable or otherwise stored
so that it can be invoked later. More commonly, in Perl 6, however, the
"pointy sub" form of anonymous routine is used:

    my $f = -> $x, $y { $x.substr(0, $y) };

Notice that the parentheses are dropped around the signature in
a pointy sub. This is not just saving characters. The presence of
parentheses would indicate that the sub takes one parameter that should be
expanded to a list of two elements, as opposed to taking two parameters.

A common usage for pointy blocks is in function vectors:

```
sub perform-operator($operator, $lhs, $rhs) {
	my %operator-vector =
		'+' => -> $a, $b { $a + $b },
		'-' => -> $a, $b { $a - $b },
		'*' => -> $a, $b { $a * $b },
		'/' => -> $a, $b { $a / $b };

	# Now call the required function:
	return %operator-vector{$operator}($lhs, $rhs);
}
```

Pointy blocks show up in Perl 6 most often in a place where it might not
be obvious that they are actually a separate construct. That is, in looping
constructs such as `for`:

    for @a -> $x {
        say $x;
    }

But this is, indeed, a pointy block in action. In fact, the signature of
that anonymous routine controls how the for loop will behave. Every
routine has what is called an arity, which is the number of positional
parameters that it takes. In the above example, the arity is one, but
if you change it to two:

    for @a -> $x, $y {
        say "$x $y";
    }

Now you have a loop that reads the list two elements at a time.

There are four basic ways that anonymous subs are typically declared:

* With the `sub` keyword
* With the `->` (pointy) operator
* As plain blocks, possibly using
  [placeholders](https://docs.perl6.org/language/variables#The_^_twigil)
* By using the [whatever](https://docs.perl6.org/type/Whatever) syntax
  via the `*` operator.

We've already seen the first two, so let's look at the last two:

### Blocks as routines

When you write:

```
my $x = 42;
{
	say $x;
}
```

You don't typically think of this as anything other than extra syntax.
The braces don't change the way the code behaves, and you could just as
easily have written:

```
my $x = 42;
say $x;
```

But that block is a routine in disguise. You can even call it:

```
my $x = 42;
{
	say $x++;
	&?BLOCK() if $x < 50;
}
```

which outputs the numbers 42 through 49. This isn't a very useful example,
but a block being passed as a routine is quite common in Perl 6, such as
with `grep`:

```
(^100).grep({.is-prime})
```

In this example, grep is passed a block which expects the variable
`$_` to have been set to an element of the range (0 through 99). It
invokes that variable's `is-prime` method and returns its result,
filtering the primes in the range. We tend to think of this as passing
a `Routine`, but that's not quite true. If we ask it `WHAT` it is:

```
$ perl6 -e 'say {.is-prime}.WHAT'
(Block)
```

It clarifies for us. These blocks-as-routines can also implicitly declare
parameters using the "placeholder" syntax:

```
(^100).grep({$^n.is-prime})
```

In this example, `$^n` is called a placeholder. When Perl sees it, it
modifies the immediately enclosing `Block` to have a signature that takes
one more formal, positional parameter. If you re-use this name, it has
no further effect and so it's now just a normal variable that came from
the argument list:

```
(^100).grep({$^n.is-prime or $^n == 10})
```

It's important to understand that this isn't some magic that `grep` is
doing. A block can always behave like this in Perl 6.

### Whatever and `WhateverCode`

The last form is only really useful in very small cases. It's never something
that you want to build large blocks of code with because it would quickly
become too cumbersome. However, for many routine tasks, the "whatever"
is extremely handy. For example, a sequence can be defined by using the
`...` operator. The arguments are:

* Some number of list values
* An optional block or routine
* And a terminal value.

Here is a list of the odd numbers from 1 to 100:

    1, {$^n + 2} ... 100

Notice the placeholder syntax from the previous section. But there's
a shorter way to write this:

    1, * + 2 ... 100

In this example, the `*` operator acts like the placeholder $^n, but it
does even more work. It forces the expression that it's within to become
an implicit block, taking a parameter that is then substituted for the
`*`. This is called a
[`WhateverCode`](https://docs.perl6.org/type/WhateverCode).

You can even use more than one. For example, the Fibonacci sequence can be
declared quite simply using the whatever operator twice:

    1, 1, * + * ... ∞


Just like placeholders, each `*` will modify the implicit block's signature
to include one more formal, positional parameter and because the sequence
operator checks the arity of the block or routine it is passed, it will
consume that many previous values from the list each time, just like a
`for` loop would.

## Conclusion

If there is just one thing that you learn from this article, I hope it is
that Perl 6 blocks are much more than meets the eye and whether they are
declared explicitly or implicitly, they have all of the power of a routine
at their disposal. They can call and be called, have parameters and be
passed as values just like named or anonymous routines.

This makes Perl 6 fairly unusual in non-Lisp-derived languages and, to my
knowledge, completely unique in the C-derived tree of languages that
includes C, C++, AWK, Java, Perl 5, Python and so on.
